Good evening.
Could you start by telling me your name, where you were born and when you were born?
My name is Rupert Minto.
My two middle names, I just put RRL.
I was born in Jamaica, St. Anne's, Brownstone.
I lived there until I was 15.
My mum lived when I was about 13 years old, to come to England.
We split up with my dad.
So after the splitting up, I will live with my uncle and his family.
Until I come, when mum sent for me at the age of 15.
I arrived in England in 1967, the 22nd of September.
And we lived in Birmingham, in Erdington.
A place called Erdington, one of the boroughs called Erdington.
And I lived there for a good while actually.
And then we moved to something called Field, which is, that comes down to Four Oaks at the time.
I lived there for about 7 years, 7-8 years.
I even got married there, my first wife.
And then we had two children.
I moved out and then we had two children.
And yeah, we had two children.
And then later on I moved into my own flat.
And then we had the third.
And then we, you know, we bought a house.
Me and my first wife.
That fell through after about 9 years.
And then I lived on my own field like a while.
I rented, you know, I rented accommodations.
And then one, you know, I went to work one morning because I'm a qualified tool maker engineer.
And I was working in this company.
And we had, we used to make even gasket for McLaren motor cars.
And I was on good money.
But I went in one morning and the gaffer comes up when he owns the company.
And he ordered three brand spanking, top of the range, rain rovers.
One for him, one for his wife and one for his son.
And then he had the cheek to come on the shop floor and said,
Sorry, I can't give you a rise this year because the government says so.
I said, you what?
He said, no, I can't give you a rise.
I said, well, if you can't give me a rise, my friend.
I said, well, what about give us some bonus and oh, I can't do that either.
I said, well, fair enough. Thank you very much.
I said, you got a week's notice.
Oh, you say you can't do that. I said, oh, yes, I can.
He was the only tool maker in the place.
I mean, you know, when you talk of tools,
I'm making tools bigger than the television in there and smaller than that cup here.
Massive.
So, you know, when I make big tools, the lorry comes for them, take it up to the place.
And then the next day I drive up there because they actually, I have my own car,
but they actually bought me a van.
Company bought me a brand new van and every three years they changed it.
And I keep that van 24 sevens.
So I got my car park up on the van.
And I went in and I said, right, I'm not working for the Simon Eager.
I said, either you do something or I'm off.
And he thought I was bluffing.
So I got week notice that lasts for three months.
And he thought I would stop there because there was some jobs I have to finish off myself.
And then after three months, I packed my tools, take them home in the van,
take everything home and bring the van back the morning and say, ta-da, gone.
So after a while, I said, my daughter then, my youngest daughter,
at that time I had three daughters.
And she had a flat and she was in a little bit of trouble with it.
So I said, two bedroom flat.
So I said, I'm moving with you and sort you out and then I'll go.
So I done that for about eight months, put her on top.
So I said, no, you can manage now.
So you know Jim down there, you still live down there.
I found him for the two first cousins.
I said to him, I said, right, I want to come down for a couple of weeks.
And a couple of weeks, probably about 20 years.
I found we bought this house, me and Val.
We live here for 14 years.
So I live with Jim for about a couple of years.
Then I live with Bassett for about four years.
Then we moved and bought this house.
So that's about it.
So you know, when I come down here, the first job I went to,
he said, when can you start?
I said, have I got a job then?
He said, skill like yours, we've been looking for it.
So I started and it's a place in Cumbrian,
you've got airplanes, you know, you can't tow seatings at the time.
And then he got me a job.
I think at the moment, you've got Saffron.
I worked there for, ooh.
That's the only place I worked then, yeah.
So we live here 14 years.
Bassett, probably about four.
And I got a job when I lived with Jim, so four and four.
I worked there for about a year.
And then I moved to the next place.
I got a job when I lived with Jim, so four and four.
I worked there for, right up from about, I can't tell you the year.
I can't remember the year when I started there.
But I worked there for about at least 16, 17 years.
I worked there.
And then after I retired, I said, that's it.
I done six months over.
I said, I'm going to do 12 months.
And then we went on holiday and come back.
And there was a letter from my doctor, which is then going around there.
At least very surgery.
And he says, I have to come in the office.
So we were going, he said, oh, we're calling for a flu job.
So I said, I never take it in my life.
So why should I take it now?
So he said, well, since we got it, might as well take it.
We want another one.
I said, no, I don't want it.
And they actually talked me into it.
So I took the flu job the Friday and Saturday morning I get up with Gout.
And that's how I decided to pack up work there.
He said, I could move.
And I never feel pain like that in my life.
So that's it.
They just packed up.
And then a few of the next, I think two girls from the office came down here to see me because I couldn't move.
And they said, right, we can give it, you know, see if it works.
And they said, I don't know when I'll be any better to come back to work.
She said, well, we come down here to give you an option.
You can have redundants with full paid.
I said, well, that's fair enough.
So I took that.
But, you know, I mean, I still go up there sometimes and see the lads and have a chat with them.
But apart from that, I meet a lot of people down here, different function and things like that.
That's how I meet your dad, your granddad.
And we met and then, you know, both of us, we just get it off just like that.
And they were chatting, talking, saying, if he goes, then he's going out anyway.
And sometimes I don't know if he tells you, but sometimes we phone up each other and say, what are you doing?
And he said, nothing much.
I said, OK, then shall we have tea or lunch or something like that?
Most of the time we go to Tesco and Cardiff Road.
We go in there, if I choose, you know, I mean, I drive up there, park in Tesco's car park.
And then we go in Tesco and we have lunch and sit there and have a good chat.
And then I took him home and drive him home.
So everywhere we go, he said, I'll take a taxi.
I said, no, I'll drive you home.
What do you remember about your childhood in the Caribbean, growing up in the Caribbean?
Oh, fun.
And lots of it.
We used to have different seasons where we have different games.
Sometimes, you know, I mean, I can't tell you what season it is, but I know it's in the summer.
You have like kite where you make your own kite and sail it in the air.
What we used to do as lads, we used to get razor blade and we get like a piece of bamboo, split it,
and then put the razor blade in to push one side of the razor blade in there and tie the razor blade.
You know, you know, where the razor blade comes in.
Tie it around with strings and then put it on your kite string.
You know, they call it the tie like they call it.
The tail of the kite, not the string was standing up, the tail of it.
The tail, so to keep the kite balanced in the air.
And we used to go kite hunting, you know, go sailing up like I live down, we call down there, Lincoln.
I used to go take the kite up to Summer Hill to sail with the razor blade and it, you see.
So when all the kites came out, we put a short list on our kite, a short string on our kite.
So it wouldn't go too far and then pull it up against the head and then when the tail comes up,
the razor blade would slip the cord and we have men over there, boys over there, side.
We give them back the kite, but we keep the cord.
At the end of the season, I probably have a bowl, you know, made about that long and about that long.
But it's not just us doing it.
They do it to somebody else, somewhere else.
It's all over the district, all over the island, all over the parish, you know, different things.
But we all make a joke of it and then at the end of it, we laugh and say, who's got the biggest bong?
We have fun, then we have to have, you know, you're a world of geek, you're a world of geek.
We don't buy a geek over there, we make our own.
We used to make it from cotton tree or guava tree or pimento, which is tough wood.
So you know what I mean?
So you make a gig and you make for yourself, you make a tiny little one.
And then they'll make big ones and then you say, right, you know, we used to put the gig there, head up.
So you got to put the sprite there and then the gig on top there.
And we used to take spot shot at the gig, you know what I mean?
You have to really hold them and see how close you can get.
But the idea is to get it onto the gig and to cause damage.
And the one that causes the most damage is the winner.
So when you have a little gig like that, you know what I mean?
You can cause a lot of damage with it because the big gig, when they come after it, they always miss.
You know what I mean?
Either too close or not close enough.
They never really get the target.
But with a small gig, you can hit the target because there's a big and it's only small.
That's always, you know, we do that.
We used to have animals as well.
And I used to have a bull cow.
You know what I mean?
Massive he was.
But I never tied him.
In the evening, I tied him and I took him out in the morning to feed.
But when you pick him up in the evening, I come in and just let him there.
I never tied him.
He wouldn't go anywhere.
He wouldn't strike.
He knows where his boundaries.
And that's it.
I used to have goats as well.
Actually, I have four goats.
And same with them.
They take them out and you know what I mean?
We got about, I'll leave with my uncle after my mom come to England before I come here.
And we are probably about 15 acres of land.
And then it's all wired around.
The land is all wired around.
It's back wired.
So there's no need to tie them up.
Only when you take them out in the morning, you know, you take them out so they can feed in one place.
You tie them so when you go back in the evening, you know where they are.
You see they have to run around looking for them.
You know where they are.
And my school days, we got good fun out there, man.
Really good fun.
The difference what I find when I come to England is the classrooms.
It's completely different.
In Jamaica, you are one teacher teaching probably about 90 kids.
And you know, they got them in three groups like A, B and C.
See like, if you're bright, you in A.
If you're less bright, you in B.
But if you a bit awkward, you in C.
And that's how they teach you.
And there's one teacher.
See they'll move from one class to another.
You got that one teacher for 12 months.
See if you don't pass your exams, you're there another 12 months.
You're there another 12 months.
With the same teacher.
But I think the longest I have stayed in one class is probably about nine months.
Because so far, you know what I mean, I was always a brilliant reader.
But when it comes to maths and history and things like that, I wasn't as strong a reader as the rest.
I take more time to study.
And I make sure I can, I could study a book and then I could recite it afterwards.
And that's what I, you know what I mean, that's how I stick to what I do and all my exams.
I do the same thing.
I passed to go to high school, but I, you know what I mean, my dad wouldn't contribute to it too much.
I said, no, leave it.
I stick with the old school I goes to.
And then I about the age of four, coming up to 14, face a person, you know, they kick you out of school at 15 and a half.
Age of 14, I said I had enough of this.
So I went and worked with my uncle until I leave there and come to England.
So I worked as a carpenter.
I worked as a plasterer.
Well, when I said plaster in Jamaica, bricklaying and plaster is the same trade.
Because you do the bricklaying and then you come back and you do the plastering.
You don't do like bricklaying and somebody else do the plastering.
You do it yourself.
You do the whole complete thing.
What do you remember about the discipline in the households back in Jamaica?
Oh, there was discipline, all right.
You see, what I remember about that, the older one disciplined the younger ones.
So if you was a dad, like, you know, he was 10 years old, 12 years old, would discipline you.
And then a 14 year old would discipline him and his stages.
So the old, as I said, I didn't live with my dad after my mom's life.
But there I live with my uncle.
But my uncle, he never ever whipped me, not my auntie.
Never whipped me.
Never beat me.
I don't do anything to do with whipping.
If there was nothing there, you would have a big oven and it was wood fired, so it was dry wood.
And there was none.
I just go up the hill because I ain't got to go far from the hill because the house we built is right underneath a hillside.
You just climb up there and there's always dry tree up there.
You cut down a few and roll it down.
And you just roll down.
And then we also have this great big cast iron stove.
And you put the wood in one side of it and light it and then you have six burners on the top.
So you can cook six pots at the same time.
It was fun.
And I got my own bedroom.
My bedroom was the only one in there with flooring, wood flooring.
And then I wouldn't let nobody clean my bedroom.
I have to clean it myself.
I like to see when it's clean and shine.
And I mean, and it's got wardrobe and a dressing table in there and one chair so I can do my own work.
It was fun.
I thought there was about 14 of us living in the house because the house was about 16 apartments, massive house.
My uncle was a building contractor so he built his own house.
And he, one of the rooms he built, there was a tank underneath the room and then the room built on top.
So, like in the drought, that day there was a reserve to go through.
So we always have water.
And everybody, you know, all the boys could drive at the age of probably about 10 years, 10, 12 years old.
And we used to take it in terms.
We used to have like this big stone crusher just down the bottom.
My uncle owns half and, well, the Charlie's, the Chairman Charlie's is a big man, white man.
And he had his store in Brownstone.
And then he owns the other half of the stone crusher.
So they owned the crusher between us.
So as boy pitney, we used to rush home and we used to have two vans to pick up a ton and a quarter and a ton and a half.
And he's the first one who reached home in charge of that one.
I was driving since I was 12 years old, I'm young.
Drawing stone.
Man, you got more blocks than stones.
But every trip you make, to we didn't have no, and you know, you could, you know, it's a big property.
People used to gather the stones out, dig stones, and we'd draw it for the, you know, so we'd just write down how many stones, you know, how many loads of stones we'd draw from him.
So each load of stone the van picked up, they'd get ten shillings.
And they guarantee all the ten shillings, they'd give me one.
So anyone being kind to me, I'd bring their stone more.
So, you know, when you get my old man, my old man, I used to see him.
And he used to give my auntie some money and give me a pound, my pocket money.
And in them days my friend, that's it.
I never ask if your books know anything because I used to save that money.
I spent some, but I saved some, and all the books I want I buy.
So I don't have to give them away to anybody else.
Because sometimes, you know, you're doing lessons, you need them books to fall back on.
And so if you give them away, you got nothing, you know what I mean?
But you know, in Jamaica it was real nice, man.
But mango time, orange time, growing over, coconut.
They had seen the boys at home, my friend.
We'd gone out to forage for ourselves, you know what I mean?
We carried things home.
We carried things home, but especially in the school all the day, you know what I mean?
Like, summer we used to get six weeks summer, Christmas four weeks, Easter two weeks.
And they had days now and again.
Once the boys do what they're supposed to do at home, nobody bothers you.
The time was yours, if you know what I mean.
Nobody bothers you.
But when I come, you know what I mean, then I come to England, 1967.
I leave the, the September the 21st and I land there the 22nd.
When I come here, the first thing I seen was all these houses across the, you know what I mean?
And smoke was coming up through the chimney.
And I remember saying to ma'am, I said, when she picked me up at Eadrow, it wasn't Gatwick, it was Eadrow.
She picked me up at Eadrow.
And he coming up, I said, ma'am, I said, it won't take long to get a job over here, innit?
She said, why?
I said, all these bakeries they got over here.
For the only thing we see in Jamaica with a chimney is a bakery.
Nothing more.
No, why you see they got chimneys out there?
Because you don't need it.
And she said, son, I wanted, I don't want to disappoint you too much.
But that's not a bakery, that's a house.
I said, you mean to tell me you take me away from where I got to bring me to a bakery?
And she said, you'll find out when you go home.
Anyway, we go home.
And she said, well, that's your room in there.
It was a nice room.
Good-sized room.
Probably about the size of the third bedroom and the size here.
But you could get a double bed in there and a wardrobe.
And she said, ah.
And then, you know what I mean, that was September.
I go back to school.
A week at home and then I was back in school in Nietzsche Secondary.
And I spent, oh, 12 months.
And then time to go to work.
But before all that comes, I think it was September, October, it started to snow.
And I'd never seen snow before.
I read of snow.
I'd seen it in a book.
You know what I mean?
All the, I was all there looking.
And these flakes, and I said, son, mama, I said, all you need now is some syrup.
In Jamaica, what we do, they do the big block of ice and it's like a shaver.
I said, shave the ice.
And you knock it out.
I said, it's rammed.
Shave it and knock it and shave it and knock it.
Then you take it out, slide it out and slide it in a cup and pour syrup all over it.
And that was the, you know, the trepons, which is half a tanner.
I said, all you need now, mama, is some syrup.
She said, you can't eat that.
She said, come out.
You have a chill blade.
I said, what's that?
I said, this is fun.
I even lay down in the rolling in the snow.
I tell the man, I had a chill blade, my friend.
I screamed.
I never feel pain like that in my life.
I said, I want to go home.
I want to go home.
So tell me about your experiences and your story coming into Newport and what was it like?
What was the culture like?
Well, before I come to Newport, I was in Birmingham for a good while.
All my youths, I married and even divorced, and three children in Birmingham.
And I said, get up one morning and just leave with my daughter.
And she said, still working.
And I said, right.
You're right now.
You can manage now, eh?
She said, yes, dad.
They take me up the road.
So you can get yourself and put yourself right.
But the kids, that was the last one I was living with.
And then it was Kelly.
She died now, she died a few years ago.
And I found Jim and said, oh, I'm coming down for two weeks.
And that two weeks probably lasted for 18 years, 18, 19 years.
So I come down and I didn't have the urge to go back, if you know what I mean.
I visited Birmingham because I got friends up there.
But I didn't have the urge to go back.
I started working there.
And I was having good money.
So I was not as good as I was in Birmingham, but not far off.
If with overtime, a lot more.
And I could do as much overtime as I wanted, but I limit myself so far.
I work Saturday and Sunday.
Because I get double time for Sunday and time and a half for Saturday.
So I work them.
And I do about two hours a night, sometimes in a week.
But mostly hour and a half I done.
Going over early and then staying another half an hour and then come home.
So, you know, it helped us to pay off this house.
So ten years we paid this house off.
You know what I mean.
Hard savings to do it.
Really, really hard savings and sacrifice.
But we did it.
Talking about money.
Yeah.
How much did it cost you to come to the UK from Jamaica?
Oh dear.
Mmm.
It didn't cost me cost Mum.
Oh dear.
It was less than £100.
If I'm not mistaken.
It's about £60, £68.
I can't remember the direct figure.
But I think it's somewhere in that region.
And you flew over.
What was the journey like?
What was the journey like flying over?
It was quite comfortable actually.
We stopped off in New York.
For 12 hours.
And you know what I mean.
Being a young lad.
You know you've got like a tutor with you.
So you know you wouldn't get lost or anything.
But when I stopped in New York, I quite liked it in there.
I said, oh this is fun.
But it was just coming up to the winter.
This is fun I said.
Quite nice.
And then we boarded the plane again and it took off in England.
I was going to, I paid to come to Birmingham.
So I was waiting for the next plane to take me in from each road to Birmingham.
And Mum come to each road and meet me.
So I lose the third flight.
But I went to school in two weeks.
I didn't have any problems.
People have problems but I didn't have any.
You know what I mean.
It's like I just fit in.
Even the headmaster said, even when I leave in school, the headmaster said,
I've never seen anyone like that.
I just fit in.
Don't have arguments with nobody or anything.
Just fit in.
And what was the education system like in the UK compared to your time in school in Jamaica?
Well, I must admit, the education in Jamaica was good.
But UK was, I would say, slightly better.
I'm going to give you the reason why.
Because in Jamaica, you know what I mean, in your class,
English, maths, any other subject you go through, history, geography, science,
there's only one teacher.
You don't leave from one class and go to another class and go to another class.
You've got the same teacher that teaches you everything.
So it took me a while to work it out.
So when you start moving up to another class,
the same teacher does everything.
And everything the teachers do, some of them have different ways of bringing it out to you.
So it makes you, you know what I mean, you can be confused at times, if I speak the truth.
It makes you confused at times because you don't know what's what from what's not.
Because every one of them have a different way of teaching it.
But when I come over and go back to school, it's not like that.
To me, the way they do it in England wasn't proper. Why?
This man is like maths, this one is like English, science, history, and things like that.
So everybody teaches one subject, if you know what I mean.
And he's specializing in that one subject, not specializing in about ten others.
One subject. So he can more or less recite that subject all the way through.
And I find that's a better idea of teaching.
Even when I go back to Jamaica on holiday, I go back to school,
and I actually go and see some of the class teachers and I told them, I said,
it's all wrong what you're doing, one teacher shouldn't be doing that.
Because one teacher don't know everything.
If you specialize in English, that's what you should be teaching.
If you specialize in maths, that's what you should be teaching.
If you specialize in geometry, that's what you should be teaching.
And not one teacher doing all that, you see.
And I said, I think now at the moment things are slightly different now in Jamaica with the teaching.
But as I said, I enjoy it, you know what I mean.
I never had a police record.
Passed my test first time.
And matter of fact, I passed my test a week before I was 17.
What do you recall about the food coming into the UK compared to Jamaica?
Oh no, no, no, no, no, no good bars in there. No good bars in the door.
Well, you know, from where it's coming from and how long it takes, it's not too bad.
But it's not no comparison to the one you eat.
You go to Jamaica, you know, you first take a piece of yam, yellow yam or any yam you want.
And that yam is fit and you cooked it or you roast it.
So sometimes you roast it.
You roast it and you get like a knife and you push it there.
And if it comes up and it's red, it's not bad.
So you leave it, you pull the fire out and then eat it and let it soak, let the steam soak it.
And when you're done again and it dries all the way, it's roast.
So you don't peel it then, you scrape it.
So you got like a hard skin, like a bacon skin, if you know what I mean.
You know like the pig skin, you know, when you fry it and that crispy part of it, that tough crispy, you got like that.
So you split it in two, scrape the middle out, let it be a middle out and put butter in it and then close it back.
Then leave it on top of the fire.
Let it simmer then the butter goes all the way through.
And when you eat that man, sometimes the butter runs down there.
Oh man, I went back home and I said to them, you know, the first time I went back home, I said to them,
do you know what I want?
They said what?
A piece of roast yam.
What I want is you roast it and I scrape it and I put it and then put the butter in.
You know what I mean?
Just the taste of it.
I tried it over here, don't taste the same.
Don't taste the same.
It's just the taste of it man.
And you know, somebody did the food over there my friend.
They got some yams over there and you cut it and it looks like you cut it in a dumpling.
You know, you cut it and the knife going through slowly.
You take a piece and you chew it, my friend.
Chew it, my friend, it's grimy so you have to, it can choke you.
So you got to be very careful how you eat it, my friend.
And the one they call the yellow yam, you rid of it, ain't you?
Back home, my friend, when you got a really good piece of yellow yam,
this is the plait with the food in and this is the jug of water.
Because you need that to eat that.
It's that dry, if it slipped on the wrong choke, my friend, you want water.
You want water, my friend.
So you just have some good time, man.
Go to the beach.
So as I said, my uncle was a building contractor.
So he used to build houses all over the place.
So he built sometimes at the seaside so he goes there.
I'm not a strong swimmer, but I could help myself.
You go there, the man, you look out and nobody there.
All clothes are dipping.
Noddy.
Nobody takes it, you know what I'm saying.
Especially the houses away from the road.
Nobody look for your spy on you, man.
You just jump in there, noddy.
You look around, dry yourself, pull your clothes out and you're gone.
As I said, when you come down the season, orange season,
Stangerine, you got some cold mangerine as well.
Similar to Stangerine, you peel them the same way,
but they're probably twice as big as Stangerine.
You got star apple.
You got apple, you got plums.
And each of them don't come in like in the same time.
Weeks apart they come in.
So you have plenty of time to go around.
And if you eat this one of the soy, you wipe it off the list.
The one that lives in the birds.
It's got to be sweet, man.
Sugar cane time, you go out and you have some cane back home.
They call it the governor cane.
And the most people's, each house you go to, each home you go to,
you'll have like one or two roots in there.
You just have to plant one sucker in.
And then in about 12 months, my friend, you have about a massive,
the way it grows, massive, so you can go in there
and break a cane out and nobody misses it.
But it's just the top half and the bottom.
You plant it back somewhere else and then that bears up again.
And peel them as you go.
We have all these at home, which we got access to 24-7s.
But we don't trust them.
They're not interested.
We're going to raid other people's.
It's more fun to raid them.
So we raid them and they raid us.
That's what the kids act.
Peer time, they have a call up here.
You go down a tree and it's good side, but it's like watery.
No, no, we don't want that.
That's a few pigs.
But anytime we come to a tree and it's dry, you know what I mean?
That's it, my friend, that mark.
And we make sure to time it.
You always have a good climber in the lot.
The bloke who owns it, he said,
well, climb it up and pick some so I can have some as well to eat.
He goes up and...
The boy you know you have a bag of pear coming home with.
Orange is the same thing.
Coconut is the same thing.
We used to steal the next door coconut, didn't we?
Mars Ralf, he got about six or seven coconuts.
Mars Ralf, can we have a coconut now?
But you can buy one.
So I said, OK Mars Ralf, we buy them.
He said, OK, then go and pick them.
I said, no, we pick them later.
So later on, somebody...
I was a hopeless climber.
Somebody climbed it and then the old bunch of us, we just kick it off.
The old bunch of us, we only buy a few ones.
Sometimes he called us and he said,
oh, you can, while you're up there, you can bring me some down.
He said, oh yeah, jelly coconut.
You ever drink jelly coconut?
You don't know what you're missing, son.
You don't know what you're missing.
But you're living...
When you get a good jelly coconut, you ask your granddad,
you cut it and you put it in the fridge and let it cool.
And then you drink that, my friend, oh man, you don't know what you're missing.
So you throw the water out and then you split the husks,
you know, they are jelly coconut in too because it doesn't get hard.
It's still soft.
And you get your cut platter, you chip a little piece of the same outside skin
and you scoop it out and you eat that.
You know what I mean?
We call that jelly.
Man, that's...
Every time I think of it, I think that I want to go home.
Orange is the same thing.
And if the orange tree is sour, we mark it.
Leave that for the birds. We don't want that.
You got some orange, they call it, label orange.
And they're that size and bigger.
You couldn't finish one.
And some of them sweet.
That sweet is cladding.
So you eat two or three pegs and you don't want no more.
You know what I mean?
You dish it out and give all the rest.
Too sweet cladding.
Can't eat it.
And some of them are that big.
So you think you peel it and you peg it.
So you peg and some of the pegs are about that long.
And they like, throw up all the way down.
You eat two, you don't want no more.
Cladding, man.
What was your experience then, tasting British cuisine, British food?
When I come here first, fish and chips, I like it.
Pie and chips I wasn't too clever about.
I said no.
But the fish in the batter, that tastes good to me.
I like it.
And when I go to school, I used to have school dinners.
I used to like some of the puddings over there.
Sponge pudding and things like that with custard.
I used to like that.
But most of the dinners, I mean,
I would eat a little bit.
But I wouldn't finish it because some of them you have to add salt to it.
I said no, I said you're supposed to cook with salt.
When you cook with salt, everything goes in it.
Only salt goes in the food because you put the salt in the water.
So the water cooks the food, so everything goes in there.
But you have to add salt to it.
I didn't see the sense in that.
I just didn't see the sense in that.
Was it easy to keep in touch with friends and family back home?
Yes and no.
Because not many people have a telephone.
Only the wealthy do have telephones.
You'd have to go to the town and then you could use a phone in the town.
If I want to talk to my mom, I'd write her and give her a number.
She can phone me at that special time.
And then she could phone and then I'll be there.
And then whoever owns the phone will talk to her and then hand it to me.
And then you probably say, oh well, you have to pay such and such for the car.
So I just do.
Mom has to pay over here, but it's still cost a bit over there, so you have to pay for it.
But you could still talk to people.
When you're back home and talking.
But mostly you're talking, you do two letters.
You write a letter and send it through the post and she'll get it.
That's how she used to send me money, through the post.
And do you keep in touch with people in Jamaica now?
Yeah, I do.
I do.
Not as often as I should do, but I still keep in touch with them.
Now and again, I found them over there.
And if anything goes wrong, they'll phone me.
I try and help them if I can.
What would you say the biggest tradition or custom that you miss from Jamaica is?
Fresh fruit.
Fresh fruit, man.
Do you ever eat sugar cane?
Do you eat sugar cane?
Well, we've got some, they call it the governor cane.
Which is, you know what I mean?
It's about that big.
And it's big.
But it's not that big.
It's about that big.
And it's big.
But it's soft.
So a joint would be about that long.
From one joint to the next joint, it's about that long.
And you only need that.
If you eat any more, my friend, that wood junkie.
Especially if it's an extra hot day, that wood junkie will be walking up there.
And you don't know where he is.
That wood junkie.
Especially if you cut it and put it down for about a week, it starts to ferment.
So you've got a brown stripe all the way through.
And you eat too much of that, my friend, and you're not going to last long.
You don't last long.
Trust me, you don't last long.
You be drunk.
I don't care how strong you are, my friend, you would be drunk.
But that thing will knock you off your feet just like that.
It's nice, but when you start eating it, my friend, you don't know when to stop.
And that's the worst part about it.
Tell me about music traditions and things you kept in the UK when you were young.
What did you keep in the UK when you came?
Well, the music, when I came to the UK, I was playing music, my friend.
That's not music.
I said that's only one beat. The beat goes ching ching ching ching ching ching.
I remember when I was going to school, in secondary, having a party.
I said, bring your records in.
I bring a few records in, and a few types, and I'm playing it.
I said, where you get these records from?
I said, those are my country music.
Oh, they're good.
Do you like our music? I said, not really.
I said, your music is all chingy ling ling ling like a one string.
I said, you have to put, you know what I mean?
I said, there's no bass in it.
I said, now you listen to this one, now you can hear the bass coming through, all the different instruments coming through.
I said, yours is all chingy ling ling ling, every single one on the same, sound the same, especially the beakers.
Which you know, killing yourself.
I said, I'll tell you the other truth, I can't see the beauty about beakers.
I said, to me, they're rubbish.
They said, oh well, every man to his own culture.
I said, well, there you are.
I said, I couldn't put it better myself.
Every man to his own culture.
What traditions have you given up or had to change?
Not a lot really.
I still eat my western dish food.
I like fish and chips, but curry, something like that.
No, I prefer the western dish curry.
I tried the British curry, I said, no, you're saying to me.
Western dish curry, you can taste it.
The spice in it and the pepper in it.
You're eating that and you're drinking water at the same time.
You're drinking water at the same time.
I said, no, I said no.
Is there any family heirlooms or any photographs or ornaments or anything of particular tradition from Jamaica that you kept?
I used to.
Where they are now, I used to keep them.
And then when the kids grow up, I distribute them to the kids.
So the kids would have them.
I mean, not me, the kids would have them.
The last one, the last daughter, Kelly, the one that died, I took her to Jamaica.
She spent what?
Three months.
Oh, she didn't want to come back.
She cried a lot.
I took her back to the Antigua Bay airport.
She cried. She didn't want to come back.
She said, I don't want to see why I should leave this to go back to where I'm going back to.
Sometimes I regret it.
I said, probably if I'd leave her there, she probably would still be alive.
But you never know, isn't it?
This is where things are.
That's the way things are sometimes, my friend.
You have to take the good with the bad and the bad with the good.
Just finally, you said your time coming to the UK, you fit straight in.
You fit right in.
I did. I just fit in.
Even when I go to work, I remember I start working on the 8th of April, 1968.
8th of April, 1968.
Printing tool maker.
We used to have a block, Mr. King.
He was a youth employment agency.
And he comes to, I used to go to school, Nietzsche Secondary.
He comes there.
And he says, right, you leave enough to go to work?
I said, I haven't find anything yet.
He said, oh, you will find.
With my maths, I'm really hoping maths.
Really that.
He said, I said, what you want to do?
I said, well, carpentry.
He said, you can do better than that.
A lot better than that.
He said, you don't want to go there and it's cold and snow and stand up in that.
He said, no.
So that's why I go into engineering.
I was a tool maker engineer.
I started off with forging tools.
You know forging tools.
I started off forging tools on the head of press tools.
Some press tools I built couldn't go through them double doors.
And meow.
From start to finish.
Some of them take me up to nine months.
Massive.
And some of them are that big.
So I enjoy.
But when I come down to Wales, I didn't do press tools.
You know me, I probably do a couple.
But not much.
I was more into CNC machines.
You know me, I watched the blogs and working it and programming it.
I said, if you can do that, my friend, I can do that.
They got no training.
They just watched them.
See what they was doing.
And then I met another chap named Gref.
He was much better than I am.
And sometimes he showed me if I'm doing it.
He said, you're doing it the hard way, man.
He said, you cycle.
You cycle.
And he showed me how to do that.
I said, that's all right, man.
I said, that's great.
So I put the cycle.
He said, you're going to write it again.
All you do is call back the cycle.
And he comes back and he does all over again the same thing.
And it goes to the next cycle.
So I was doing it.
And I said, I'm going to write it again.
And he said, you're going to write it again.
And he goes to the next cycle.
So I was doing a program.
I could make a program to do probably that clock there.
And I used 50 lines.
And when he finished, you would see the same shape of the clock there.
You see everything at the front there.
You see it.
50 lines.
All cycles.
I used cycles.
So I enjoyed it.
And if there was anything that you could pass on, any messages or anything to future generations, what would you say?
Listen.
Use this.
Drugs and smoking weed and things like that, my friend, they're all good for you.
It kills you.
And don't care what anyone say, my friend.
You smell smoking weed, my friend.
And the more you, if you smoke a joint today, I because I never tried, I never smoke in my life.
But I got friends and cousins who smoke.
And they said, when they smoke, you said you have to know how to do it, my friend.
You have to learn how to control that.
Because it will tell you.
It will give you that, that like, that demand.
If you smoke a joint today, to feel the same way tomorrow, you have to smoke a joint and a half.
And they said, if you, if you're going to do that, my friend, you are in big trouble.
You can't, you can't angle it.
So if you can't angle a thing, stay away from it.
So that's what I do.
I don't smoke and I stay away from it.
Don't get me wrong.
They say marijuana, I'll get some and I'll buckle it and throw white rum on top of it.
Leave it there.
And I tell you, after about three or four months, it turns green.
And if you have an upset stomach, my friend, you only need a tablespoon.
And you drink that, my friend.
Throw in about twice as much water as you throw out.
And you drink that.
And I tell you this much, my friend, in about an hour's time, anything down there shifted.
And you'll be ending up in the toilet.
And after that, my friend, everything just go.
You feel a bit weak, but everything just go.
And you feel, in about a couple of hours, you'll feel 100% again.
It's like a medicine, but you don't feed and you don't smoke it.
And that's what we, you know what I mean?
You buckle it, put it in the buckle, rub it in there, then pour the white rum on it.
And you turn it green.
And you leave it there for a few months, my friend.
And you have to use the tap there.
If you use just the English cork in the bathroom, you'll get a lot of smoke.
In the night, you probably hear the buckle going, boom, boom.
When you straight hit them, they blow it up.
So you have to use the screw to hold it there.
But, you know what I mean?
If you, you know, if you couple catch you in Jamaica with it, they'll arrest you when I was there.
But if you have a little bit, if you plant some of it on purpose and they come and see it, it won't be a problem.
But if they see a big bung, they know you're doing it, it's a business, they'll arrest you because it's not legal.
It's legal.
I know probably they make it legal now, which is to me one of the worst things they've ever done.
Because people out there know, my friend, who smoke it, you can't trust them.
One minute they arrest you, the next minute they can just turn and all that.
And they'll kill you.
You can't trust them.
It's a good thing, but it's a bad thing.
If you use it the wrong way, it's bad.
So you have to know what you're doing.
As I said, I don't smoke.
I tried a cigarette once, and I remember taking the second puff, and that was it.
When I woke up it was 12 hours later.
I'm not happy about that. 12 hours later I said, no, this is not for me, my friend. Not for me. Cut it out. Not for me.
Is there anything final that you would like to add?
In England, since I've been over here, if I'm going to tell anybody I haven't seen pretty, I'm lying.
You see how?
But it never been used on me, if you know what I mean.
I always get down with people.
The department I work in, when I work in Cumberland, visiting, I was the only black person in there.
You go in the canteen, and 90% of you are the only black in the canteen.
But I'm fit in.
I don't go in and tell people, oh well, I'm black and I'm the one who's mixed with you.
My grandfather always says, when you go to another country, it's not yours, so you're fit in.
It's not your country.
Even in Jamaica, it's your own country, so you're fit in.
You can't say, oh well, I'm a Jamaican, so I can't do anything.
He said, no you can't.
There's law and orders anywhere you go in this world, so you have to learn how to fit in.
And I said to you, I never come with no running with polythene, I have to put on and cover my hands.
Never in my life.
And now I'm 71, I don't intend to, to go that far.
I mean, if I tell anybody I haven't been stopped for speeding, I'll be lying.
But I've never been booked for speeding.
I stopped, showed my license, they said, okay, that's it, don't do it again.
And that's it.
But they book you and then give you points on your license for speeding? No.
Never had that.
I even caught it on camera.
I'll get away with it.
I said, I had a good life in this country, and I find a lot of those been on for me.
A hell of a lot of those.
Because I have respect for everybody.
You know what I mean?
People go, oh well, you have to watch them.
I said, no man, I said everybody do their own thing, my friend.
You have to do yours.
Whether he's white, black, Asian, or what you want to call him?
He does his own thing, you do your own.
He said, just, just all you got to remember is have respect for what he does and he will have respect for what you does.
I said, you can't remember that, my friend.
You'll go far away.
Don't go and tell him, so what he's doing is wrong.
Because to him what he's doing is right.
And what you're doing to you is right.
Don't go and tell him, people say, oh well man, you're doing it the wrong way.
I said, no man. I said everybody have to make his own mistake.
I said, I make mistakes.
I make a few.
Sometimes I like to turn the clock back, but you can't.
So you're stuck with it.
So the best thing to do is to say we can avoid it and say we can pass it over and get on with what's in front of you.
Well, it's been an absolute pleasure and a colourful story.
I visualised being in Jamaica and, you know, the fresh fruit.
And it's fantastic that you've had such an amazing experience, you know, we're here in the UK.
I just want to thank you so much for your time today.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you.